 II.53 My abridgment comes.] Hamlet alludes to the players, whose approach will shorten his talk.  II.54 Thy face is valanced] i.e., fringed with a beard. The valance is the fringes or drapery hanging round the tester of a bed.  II.55 Com'st thou to beard me] To beard anciently meant to set at defiance. Hamlet having just told the player that his face is valanced, is playing upon the word beard.  II.56 By the altitude of a chopine.] A chioppine is a high shoe, or rather clog, worn by the Italians. Venice was more famous for them than any other place. They are described as having been made of wood covered with coloured leather, and sometimes even half a yard high, their altitude being proportioned to the rank of the lady, so that they could not walk without being supported.  II.57 Like French falconers,] The French seem to have been the first and noblest falconers in the western part of Europe. The French king sent over his falconers to show that sport to King James the First. —See Weldon's Court of King James.  II.58 Quality;] Qualifications, faculty.  II.59 Caviare to the general;] Caviare is the spawn of fish pickled, salted, and dried. It is imported from Russia, and was considered in the time of Shakespeare a new and fashionable luxury, not obtained or relished by the vulgar, and therefore used by him to signify anything above their comprehension—general is here used for the people.  II.60 As much modesty as cunning.] As much propriety and decorum as skill.  II.61 Falls with the whiff and wind of his fell sword] Our author employs the same image in almost the same phrase:  "The Grecians fall  Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword."  Tr. & Cress. V. 3. Tr.  II.62 The rack] The clouds or congregated vapour.  II.63 The mobled queen?] Mobled is veiled, muffled, disguised.  II.64 All his visage wann'd;] i.e., turned pale or wan.  II.65 His whole functions suiting with forms to his conceit?] i.e., his powers and faculties—the whole energies of his soul and body giving material forms to his passion, such as tone of voice, expression of face, requisite action, in accordance with the ideas that floated in his conceit or imagination.  II.66 The cue] The point—the direction.  II.67 Like John a-dreams,] Or dreaming John, a name apparently coined to suit a dreaming, stupid person; he seems to have been a well-known character.  II.68 Unpregnant of my cause,] i.e., not quickened with a new desire of vengeance; not teeming with revenge.  II.69 Defeat was made.] Overthrow.  II.70 Lack gall to make oppression bitter;] i.e., lack gall to make me feel the bitterness of oppression.  II.71 Kindless] Unnatural.  II.72 About, my brains!] Wits to work.  II.73 I'll tent him to the quick:] i.e., probe him—search his wounds.  II.74 Blench,] Shrink, start aside.  II.75 More relative than this:] Directly applicable.  49  ACT III. Scene I.—A ROOM IN THE CASTLE. Three chairs on L.H., one on R.  Enter King and Queen, preceded by Polonius. Ophelia, Rosencrantz, and Giuldenstern, following (R.H.)  King. (C.) And can you, by no drift of conference,  Get from him why he puts on this confusion?  Ros. (R.) He does confess he feels himself distracted;  But from what cause he will by no means speak.  Guild. (R.) Nor do we find him forward1 to be sounded  But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,  When we would bring him on to some confession  Of his true state.  Queen. (R.C.) Did you assay him2  To any pastime?  Ros. Madam, it so fell out, that certain players  We o'er-raught on the way:3 of these we told him;  And there did seem in him a kind of joy  To hear of it: They are about the court;  And, as I think, they have already order  This night to play before him.  Pol. 'Tis most true:  And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties  To hear and see the matter.  King. With all my heart; and it doth much content me  To hear him so inclin'd.  Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,  And drive his purpose on to these delights.  Ros. We shall, my lord.  [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, R.H.]  50King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;  For we have closely sent4 for Hamlet hither,  That he, as 'twere by accident, may here  Affront Ophelia:5  Her father and myself (lawful espials6),  Will so bestow ourselves, that, seeing, unseen,  We may of their encounter frankly judge;  And gather by him, as he is behaved,  If't be the affliction of his love or no  That thus he suffers for.  Queen. (R.) I shall obey you:  And for your part, Ophelia,  [Ophelia comes down L.H.]  I do wish  That your good beauties be the happy cause  Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues  Will bring him to his wonted way again,  To both your honours.  Oph. Madam, I wish it may.  [Exit Queen, R.H.]  Pol. Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,  We will bestow ourselves. Read on this book;  [To Ophelia.]  That show of such an exercise may colour  Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,—  'Tis too much prov'd,7 that, with devotion's visage  And pious action, we do sugar o'er  The devil himself.  King. O, 'tis too true! how smart  A lash that speech doth give my conscience! [Aside.]  Pol. I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord.  [Exeunt King and Polonius, R.H. 2 E., and Ophelia, R.H.U.E.]  Enter Hamlet (L.H.)  Ham. To be, or not to be, that is the question:8  51 Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer  The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,  Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,9  And, by opposing end them?—To die,—to sleep,  No more;—and by a sleep, to say we end  The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks  That flesh is heir to: 'tis a consummation  Devoutly to be wished. To die,—to sleep,—  To sleep! perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;  For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,  When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,10  Must give us pause:11 There's the respect12  That makes calamity of so long life;  For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,13  The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,14  The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,  The insolence of office, and the spurns  That patient merit of the unworthy takes,  When he himself might his quietus make15  With a bare bodkin?16 Who would fardels bear,17  To groan and sweat under a weary life,  52 But that the dread of something after death,  The undiscovered country, from whose bourn18  No traveller returns,19 puzzles the will,  And makes us rather bear those ills we have  Than fly to others that we know not of?  Thus, conscience does make cowards of us all;20  And thus the native hue of resolution  Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought;  And enterprises of great pith and moment,21  With this regard, their currents turn away,  And lose the name of action.22 [—Ophelia returns.—] Soft you now!23  The fair Ophelia:—Nymph, in thy orisons24  Be all my sins remember'd.  Oph. (R.C.) Good my lord,  How does your honour for this many a day?  Ham. (L.C.) I humbly thank you; well.  Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours,  That I have longèd long to re-deliver;  I pray you, now receive them.  Ham. No, not I;  I never gave you aught.  Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did;  And, with them, words of so sweet breath compos'd  As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,  Take these again; for to the noble mind  53 Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.  There, my lord.  Ham. Ha, ha! are you honest?  Oph. My lord?  Ham. Are you fair?  Oph. What means your lordship?  Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.25  Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?  Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd, than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness:26 this was some time a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.  Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.  Ham. You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock, but we shall relish of it:27 I loved you not.  Oph. I was the more deceived.  Ham. Get thee to a nunnery: Why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my beck28 than I have thoughts to put them in,29 imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do, crawling between earth and heaven? 54We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your father?  Oph. At home, my lord.  Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.  Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!  Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry. Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery; farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; go; go.  Oph. Heavenly powers, restore him!  Ham. I have heard of your paintings30 too, well enough; Heaven hath given you one face, and you make yourselves another:31 you jig, you amble, and you lisp,32 and nickname Heaven's creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.33 Go to, I'll no more of't; it hath made me mad. [Hamlet crosses to R.H.] I say, we will have no more marriages: those that are married already, all but one,34 shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.  [Exit Hamlet, R.H.35]  Oph. (L.) O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!  The expectancy and rose of the fair state,36  55 The glass of fashion37 and the mould of form,38  The observ'd of all observers, quite, quite down!  And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,  That suck'd the honey of his musick vows,39  Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,  Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh:  O, woe is me,  To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!  [Exit Ophelia, L.H.]  Re-enter King and Polonius.  King. Love! his affections do not that way tend;  Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,  Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,  O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;  He shall with speed to England,  For the demand of our neglected tribute:  Haply, the seas, and countries different,  With variable objects, shall expel  This something-settled matter in his heart;  Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus  From fashion of himself. What think you on't?  Pol. It shall do well: But yet I do believe  The origin and commencement of his grief  Sprung from neglected love. My lord, do as you please;  But, if you hold it fit, after the play,  Let his queen mother all alone entreat him  To show his grief: let her be round with him;40  And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear  Of all their conference. If she find him not,41  To England send him; or confine him where  Your wisdom best shall think.  King. It shall be so:  Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.  [Exeunt, L.H.]  56Enter Hamlet and a Player (R.H.)  Ham. (C.) Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, I had as lief42 the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hands thus;43 but use all gently: for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say) whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul, to hear a robustious perrywig-pated fellow44 tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings,45 who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant;46 it out-herods Herod:47 Pray you, avoid it.  1st Play. (R.) I warrant your honour.  Ham. Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor; suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, 57scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time its form and pressure.48 Now, this overdone, or come tardy off,49 though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of which one50 must, in your allowance,51 o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,52 that, neither having the accent of christians, nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed, that I have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.  [Crosses to R.]  1st Play. (L.) I hope we have reformed that indifferently53 with us.  Ham. O, reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them:54 for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators55 to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question56 of the play be then to be considered: that's villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.  [Exit Player, L.H.]  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!  Enter Horatio (R.H.)  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.  58Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man  As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.57  Hor. O, my dear lord. Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;  For what advancement may I hope from thee,  That no revenue hast, but thy good spirits,  To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?  No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp;  And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee,58  Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?  Since my dear soul59 was mistress of her choice,  And could of men distinguish, her election  Hath seal'd thee for herself: for thou hast been  As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing;  A man that fortune's buffets and rewards  Has ta'en with equal thanks: and bless'd are those  Whose blood and judgment60 are so well co-mingled,  That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger  To sound what stop she please. Give me that man  That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him  In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,  As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—  There is a play to-night before the king;  One scene of it comes near the circumstance  Which I have told thee of my father's death:  I pr'ythee when thou seest that act a-foot,  Even with the very comment of thy soul61  Observe my uncle: if his occulted guilt62  59 Do not itself unkennel in one speech,  It is a damned ghost that we have seen;  And my imaginations are as foul  As Vulcan's stithy.63 Give him heedful note:  For I mine eyes will rivet to his face;  And, after, we will both our judgments join  In censure of his seeming.64  [Horatio goes off, U.E.L.H.]  March. Enter King and Queen, preceded by Polonius, Ophelia, Horatio, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants. King and Queen sit (L.H.); Ophelia (R.H.)  King. (L.) How fares our cousin Hamlet?  Ham. (C.) Excellent, i'faith; of the cameleon's dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.  King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.65  Ham. No, nor mine, now.66 My lord,—you played once in the university, you say?67 [To Polonius, L.]  Pol. (L.C.) That did I, my lord; and was accounted a good actor.  Ham. (C.) And what did you enact?  Pol. I did enact Julius Cæsar:68 I was killed i'the Capitol; Brutus killed me.  Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there.—Be the players ready?  Ros. Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.69  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.  [Pointing to a chair by her side.]  60Ham. No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.  Pol. O, ho! do you mark that?  [Aside to the King.]  Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?  [Lying down at Ophelia's feet.]70  Oph. (R.) You are merry, my lord.  Ham. O, your only jig-maker.71 What should a man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.  Oph. Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.  Ham. So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of sables.72 O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year: But, by'r-lady, he must build churches, then.73  Oph. What means the play, my lord?  Ham. Miching mallecho;74 it means mischief.  Oph. But what is the argument of the play?  Enter a Player as Prologue (L.H.) on a raised stage.  Ham. We shall know by this fellow.  Pro.  For us, and for our tragedy,  Here stooping to your clemency,  We beg your hearing patiently.  [Exit, L.H.]  61Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?75  Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.  Ham. As woman's love.  Enter a King and a Queen (L.H.) on raised stage.  P. King. (R.) Full thirty times hath Phœbus' cart76 gone round  Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbèd ground,77  Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,  Unite commutual in most sacred bands.  P. Queen. (L.) So many journeys may the sun and moon  Make us again count o'er ere love be done!  But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,  So far from cheer and from your former state,  That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,  Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.  P. King. 'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  My operant powers their functions leave to do:78  And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,  Honour'd, belov'd; and, haply one as kind  For husband shalt thou——  P. Queen. O, confound the rest!  Such love must needs be treason in my breast:  In second husband let me be accurst!  None wed the second but who kill'd the first.  Ham. That's wormwood.  [Aside to Horatio, R.]  P. King. I do believe you think what now you speak;  But what we do determine oft we break.79  So think you thou wilt no second husband wed;  But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.  62P. Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!  Sport and repose lock from me day and night!  Both here, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,  If, once a widow, ever I be wife!  P. King. 'Tis deeply sworn.  Ham. If she should break it now!—  [To Ophelia.]  P. King. Sweet, leave me here awhile;  My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile  The tedious day with sleep.  [Reposes on a bank, R., and sleeps.]  P. Queen. Sleep rock thy brain;  And never come mischance between us twain!  [Exit, L.H.]  Ham. Madam, how like you this play?  Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.  Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.  King. Have you heard the argument?80 Is there no offence in't?  Ham. No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i'the world.  King. What do you call the play?  Ham. The mouse-trap.81 Marry, how? Tropically.82 This play is the image of a murder83 done in Vienna: Gonzago is the Duke's name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon;—'tis a knavish piece of work: but what of that? your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not: Let the galled jade wince,84 our withers85 are unwrung.  Enter Lucianus (L.H.)  This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.  63Oph. You are as good as a chorus,86 my lord.  Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.87 Begin, murderer; leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:—  —— The croaking raven  Doth bellow for revenge.88  Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;  Confederate season, else no creature seeing;  Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds89 collected,  With Hecat's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,  Thy natural magick and dire property,  On wholesome life usurp90 immediately.  [Pours the poison into the Sleeper's Ears.]  Ham. He poisons him i' the garden for his estate. His name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and written in very choice Italian: You shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.  King. Give me some light: away!  All. Lights, lights, lights!  [Exeunt all, R. and L., but Hamlet and Horatio.]  Ham.  Why, let the strucken deer go weep,91  64 The hart ungallèd play;  For some must watch, while some must sleep:  So runs the world away.—  O, good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pounds. Didst perceive?  Hor. (R.) Very well, my lord.  Ham. (C.) Upon the talk of the poisoning.—  Hor. I did very well note him.  Ham. Ah, ah! come, some musick! come, the recorders!  [Exit Horatio, R.H.]  Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (L.H.) Hamlet seats himself in the chair (R.)  Guil. (L.C.) Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.  Ham. Sir, a whole history.  Guil. The king, sir,——  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?  Guil. Is, in his retirement, marvellous distempered.92  Ham. With drink, sir?  Guil. No, my lord, with choler.  Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more rich to signify this to the doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more choler.  Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildly from my affair.  Ham. I am tame, sir:—pronounce.  Guil. The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.  Ham. You are welcome.  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.  Ham. Sir, I cannot.  Guil. What, my lord?  Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased! But, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command: or rather as you say, my mother: therefore no more, but to the matter: My mother, you say,—  65Ros. (Crosses to C.) Then thus she says: Your behaviour hath struck her into amazement and admiration.93  Ham. O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration?—impart.  Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you go to bed.  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any further trade with us?94  Ros. My lord, you once did love me.  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers.95  [Rises and comes forward, C.]  Ros. (R.) Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do, surely, bar the door of your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.96  Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?97  Ham. Ay, sir, but While the grass grows,—the proverb is something musty.98  Enter Horatio and Musicians (R.H.)  O, the recorders:99—let me see one.—So; withdraw with you:—  [Exeunt Horatio and Musicians R.H. Guildenstern, after speaking privately to Rosencrantz, crosses behind Hamlet to R.H.]  66Why do you go about to recover the wind of me,100 as if you would drive me into a toil?101  Guil. (R.) O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.102  Ham. (C.) I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?  Guil. My lord, I cannot.  Ham. I pray you.  Guil. Believe me, I cannot.  Ham. I do beseech you.  Ros. (L.) I know no touch of it, my lord.  Ham. 'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.103 Look you, these are the stops.  Guil. But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony; I have not the skill.  Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass: and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sdeath, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.104  [Crosses to L.H.]  Enter Polonius (R.H.)  Pol. (R.) My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.  67Ham. (C.) Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?  Pol. By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.  Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.  Pol. It is backed like a weasel.  Ham. Or like a whale?  Pol. Very like a whale.  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by and by. They fool me to the top of my bent.105 I will come by and by.  Pol. I will say so.  Ham. By and by is easily said.  [Exit Polonius, R.H.  Leave me, friends.  [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, R.H.]  'Tis now the very witching time of night,  When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out  Contagion to this world: Now could I drink hot blood,  And do such bitter business106 as the day  Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother.  O, heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever  The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:  Let me be cruel, not unnatural;  I will speak daggers to her, but use none.  [Exit]  Scene II.—A ROOM IN THE SAME. Enter King, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (R.H.)  King. I like him not; nor stands it safe with us107  To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;  I your commission will forthwith despatch,  And he to England shall along with you:  Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;  68 For we will fetters put upon this fear,108  Which now goes too free-booted.  Ros.  Guil.  We will haste us.  [Cross behind the King, and exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, L.H.]  Enter Polonius (R.H.)  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:  Behind the arras I'll convey myself,109  To hear the process;110 I'll warrant, she'll tax him home:  And, as you said, and wisely was it said,  'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear  The speech of vantage.111 Fare you well, my liege:  [Polonius crosses to L.H.]  I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,  And tell you what I know.  King. Thanks, dear my lord.  [Exeunt Polonius, L.H., and King, R.H.]  Scene III.—THE QUEEN'S CHAMBER. Enter Queen and Polonius (L.H.)  Pol. He will come straight. Look, you lay home to him:112  Tell him his pranks have been too broad113 to bear with,  And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between  69 Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here.114  Pray you, be round with him.  Queen. I'll warrant you;  Fear me not:—withdraw, I hear him coming.  [Polonius hides himself, L.H.U.E.]  Enter Hamlet (R.)  Ham. (R.C.) Now, mother, what's the matter?  Queen. (L.C.) Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.  Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.  Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet!  Ham. What's the matter now?  Queen. Have you forgot me?  Ham. No, by the rood,115 not so:  You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife;  And—would it were not so!—you are my mother.  Queen. Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;  You go not till I set you up a glass  Where you may see the inmost part of you.  Queen. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?  Help, help, ho!  Pol. (Behind.) What, ho! help!  Ham. How now! a rat?116  [Draws.]  Dead, for a ducat, dead!  [Hamlet rushes off behind the arras.]  Pol. (Behind.) O, I am slain!  [Falls and dies.]  Queen. O me, what hast thou done?  Ham. (Returning.) Nay, I know not:  Is it the king?  70Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!  Ham. A bloody deed!—almost as bad, good mother,  As kill a king, and marry with his brother.  Queen. As kill a king!  Ham. Ay, lady, 'twas my word.  [Goes off behind the arras, and returns.]  Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!  [To the dead body of Polonius, behind the arras.]  I took thee for thy better.  Leave wringing of your hands: Peace; sit you down,  [To the Queen.]  And let me wring your heart: for so I shall,  If it be made of penetrable stuff;  If damnèd custom have not brazed it so,117  That it be proof and bulwark against sense.118  Queen. (Sits R.C.) What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue  In noise so rude against me?  Ham. (Seated L.C.) Such an act,  That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;  Calls virtue, hypocrite; takes off the rose  From the fair forehead of an innocent love,  And sets a blister there;119 makes marriage vows  As false as dicer's oaths: O, such a deed  As from the body of contraction plucks  The very soul;120 and sweet religion makes  A rhapsody of words.—  Ah, me, that act!  Queen. Ah me, what act?  Ham. Look here, upon this picture, and on this,  71 The counterfeit presentment121 of two brothers.  See, what a grace was seated on this brow;  Hypérion's curls;122 the front of Jove himself;  An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;  A station like the herald Mercury123  New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;  A combination, and a form, indeed,  Where every god did seem to set his seal,  To give the world assurance of a man;  This was your husband.—Look you now, what follows:  Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,  Blasting his wholesome brother.124 Have you eyes?  Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,  And batten on this moor?125 Ha! have you eyes?  You cannot call it love; for, at your age  The hey-day in the blood126 is tame, it's humble,  And waits upon the judgment: And what judgment  Would step from this to this?  O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,  If thou canst mutine,127 in a matron's bones,  To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,  And melt in her own fire.  Queen. O, Hamlet, speak no more:  Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul;  And there I see such black and grainèd spots  As will not leave their tinct.128  72Ham. Nay, but to live  In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,——129  Queen. O, speak to me no more;  No more, sweet Hamlet!  Ham. A murderer and a villain:  A slave that is not twentieth part the tythe  Of your precedent lord;—a vice of kings;130  A cutpurse of the empire and the rule;  That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,  And put it in his pocket!131  Queen. No more!  Ham. A king  Of shreds and patches.132  Enter Ghost, R.  Save me [Starts from his chair], and hover o'er me with your wings,  You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?  Queen. Alas, he's mad!  [Rising.]  Ham. (L.) Do you not come your tardy son to chide,  That, laps'd in time and passion,133 lets go by  The important acting of your dread command?  O, say!  Ghost. (R.) Do not forget: This visitation  Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.  But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:  O, step between her and her fighting soul.  Speak to her Hamlet.  Ham. How is it with you, lady?  73Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  That you do bend your eye on vacancy,  And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?  Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep.  O gentle son,  [Crosses to Hamlet.]  Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper  Sprinkle cool patience.134 Whereon do you look?  Ham. On him, on him!—Look you, how pale he glares!  His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,  Would make them capable.135 Do not look upon me;  Lest with this piteous action, you convert  My stern effects:136 then what I have to do  Will want true colour; tears perchance, for blood.  Queen. To whom do you speak this?  Ham. Do you see nothing there?  Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is, I see.137  Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?  Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.  Ham. Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!  [Ghost crosses to L.]  My father in his habit as he lived!138  Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!  [Exit Ghost, L.H. Hamlet sinks into chair C. The Queen falls on her knees by his side.]  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain:  This bodiless creation ecstasy  Is very cunning in.139  74Ham. Ecstasy!  My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,  And makes as healthful music: It is not madness  That I have uttered: bring me to the test,  And I the matter will re-word; which madness  Would gambol from.140 Mother, for love of grace,  [Rising.]  Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,  That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:  It will but skin and film141 the ulcerous place,  Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,  Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;  Repent what's past; avoid what is to come.  Queen. O, Hamlet! thou hast cleft my heart in twain.  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,  And live the purer with the other half.  Good night: but go not to my uncle's bed;  [Raising the Queen.]  Assume a virtue, if you have it not.  Once more, good night!  And when you are desirous to be bless'd,  I'll blessing beg of you.142 For this same lord,  [Pointing to Polonius.]  I do repent:  I will bestow him, and will answer well  The death I gave him. So, again, good night.  [Exit Queen, R.H.]  I must be cruel, only to be kind:  Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.  [Exit Hamlet behind the arras, L.H.U.E.]  END OF ACT THIRD. Notes Act III  III.1 Forward] Disposed, inclinable.  III.2 Assay him to] Try his disposition towards.  III.3 O'er-raught on the way:] Reached or overtook.  III.4 Have closely sent] i.e., privately sent.  III.5 May here affront Ophelia:] To affront is to come face to face—to confront.  III.6 Lawful espials,] Spies justifiably inquisitive. From the French, espier.  III.7 Too much prov'd,] Found by too frequent experience.  III.8 To be, or not to be, that is the question:] Hamlet is deliberating whether he should continue to live, or put an end to his existence.  III.9 Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,] A sea of troubles among the Greeks grew into a proverbial usage; so that the expression figuratively means, the troubles of human life, which flow in upon us, and encompass us round like a sea.  III.10 This mortal coil,] Coil is here used in each of its senses, that of turmoil or bustle, and that which entwines or wraps round.  III.11 Must give us pause:] i.e., occasion for reflection.  III.12  There's the respect That makes calamity of so long life;] The consideration that makes the evils of life so long submitted to, lived under.  III.13 The whips and scorns of time,] Those sufferings of body and mind, those stripes and mortifications to which, in its course, the life of man is subjected.  III.14 Contumely,] Contemptuousness, rudeness.  III.15 His quietus make] Quietus means the official discharge of an account: from the Latin. Particularly in the Exchequer accounts, where it is still current. Chiefly used by authors in metaphorical senses.  III.16 A bare bodkin?] Bodkin was an ancient term for a small dagger. In the margin of Stowe's Chronicle it is said that Cæsar was slain with bodkins.  III.17 Who would fardels bear,] Fardel is a burden. Fardellus, low Latin.  III.18 From whose bourn] i.e., boundary.  III.19 No traveller returns,] The traveller whom Hamlet had seen, though he appeared in the same habit which he had worn in his life-time, was nothing but a shadow, "invulnerable as the air," and, consequently, incorporeal. The Ghost has given us no account of the region from whence he came, being, as he himself informed us, "forbid to tell the secrets of his prison-house."—Malone. 