 III.20 Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;] A state of doubt and uncertainty, a conscious feeling or apprehension, a misgiving "How our audit stands."  III.21 Of great pith and moment,] i.e., of great vigour and importance.  III.22  With this regard, their currents turn away, And lose the name of action.]  From this sole consideration have their drifts diverted, and lose the character and name of enterprise.  III.23 Soft you now!] A gentler pace! have done with lofty march!  III.24 Nymph, in thy orisons] i.e., in thy prayers. Orison is from oraison—French.  III.25 If you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.] i.e., if you really possess these qualities, chastity and beauty, and mean to support the character of both, your honesty should be so chary of your beauty, as not to suffer a thing so fragile to entertain discourse, or to be parleyed with.  The lady interprets the words otherwise, giving them the turn best suited to her purpose.  III.26 His likeness:] Shakespeare and his contemporaries frequently use the personal for the neutral pronoun.  III.27 Inoculate our old stock, but we shall relish of it:] So change the original constitution and properties, as that no smack of them shall remain. "Inoculate our stock" are terms in gardening.  III.28 With more offences at my beck] That is, always ready to come about me—at my beck and call.  III.29 Than I have thoughts to put them in, &c.] "To put a thing into thought," Johnson says, is "to think on it."  III.30 I have heard of your paintings,] These destructive aids of beauty seem, in the time of Shakespeare, to have been general objects of satire.  III.31 Heaven hath given you one face, and you make yourselves another:] i.e., Heaven hath given you one face, and you disfigure his image by making yourself another.  III.32 You jig, you amble, and you lisp,] This is an allusion to the manners of the age, which Shakespeare, in the spirit of his contemporaries, means here to satirise.  III.33 Make your wantonness your ignorance.] You mistake by wanton affectation, and pretend to mistake by ignorance.  III.34 All but one shall live;] One is the king.  III.35 To a nunnery, go. Exit Hamlet.] There is no doubt that Hamlet's attachment to Ophelia is ardent and sincere, but he treats her with apparent severity because he is aware that Ophelia has been purposely thrown in his way; that spies are about them; and that it is necessary for the preservation of his life, to assume a conduct which he thought would be attributed to madness only.  III.36 The expectancy and rose of the fair state,] The first hope and fairest flower. "The gracious mark o' the land."  III.37 Glass of fashion] Speculum consuetudinis.—Cicero.  III.38 The mould of form,] The cast, in which is shaped the only perfect form.  III.39 Musick vows,] Musical, mellifluous.  III.40 Be round with him;] i.e., plain with him—without reserve.  III.41 If she find him not,] Make him not out.  III.42 As lief] As willingly.  III.43 Thus;] i.e., thrown out thus.  III.44 Robustious perrywig-pated fellow] This is a ridicule on the quantity of false hair worn in Shakespeare's time, for wigs were not in common use till the reign of Charles the Second. Robustious means making an extravagant show of passion.  III.45 The ears of the groundlings,] The meaner people appear to have occupied the pit of the theatre (which had neither floor nor benches in Shakespeare's time), as they now sit in the upper gallery.  III.46 O'er-doing Termagant;] The Crusaders, and those who celebrated them, confounded Mahometans with Pagans, and supposed Mahomet, or Mahound, to be one of their deities, and Tervagant or Termagant, another. This imaginary personage was introduced into our old plays and moralities, and represented as of a most violent character, so that a ranting actor might always appear to advantage in it. The word is now used for a scolding woman.  III.47 It out-herods Herod:] In all the old moralities and mysteries this personage was always represented as a tyrant of a very violent temper, using the most exaggerated language. Hence the expression.  III.48 The very age and body of the time its form and pressure.] i.e., to delineate exactly the manners of the age, and the particular humours of the day—pressure signifying resemblance, as in a print.  III.49 Come tardy off,] Without spirit or animation; heavily, sleepily done.  III.50 The censure of which one] i.e., the censure of one of which.  III.51 Your allowance,] In your approbation.  III.52 Not to speak it profanely,] i.e., irreverently, in allusion to Hamlet's supposition that God had not made such men, but that they were only the handy work of God's assistants.  III.53 Indifferently] In a reasonable degree.  III.54 Speak no more them is set down for them:] Shakespeare alludes to a custom of his time, when the clown, or low comedian, as he would now be called, addressing the audience during the play, entered into a contest of raillery and sarcasm with such spectators as chose to engage with him.  III.55 Barren spectators] i.e., dull, unapprehensive spectators.  III.56 Question] Point, topic.  III.57 Cop'd withal.] Encountered with.  III.58 Pregnant hinges of the knee,] i.e., bowed or bent: ready to kneel where thrift, that is, thriving, or emolument may follow sycophancy.  III.59 Since my dear soul] Dear is out of which arises the liveliest interest.  III.60 Whose blood and judgment] Dr. Johnson says that according to the doctrine of the four humours, desire and confidence were seated in the blood, and judgment in the phlegm, and the due mixture of the humours made a perfect character.  III.61 The very comment of thy soul] The most intense direction of every faculty.  III.62 Occulted guilt do not itself unkennel] Stifled, secret guilt, do not develope itself.  III.63 As Vulcan's stithy.] A stithy is the smith's shop, as stith is the anvil.  III.64 In censure of his seeming.] In making our estimate of the appearance he shall put on.  III.65 I have nothing with this answer; these words are not mine.] i.e., they grow not out of mine: have no relation to anything said by me.  III.66 No, nor mine, now.] They are now anybody's. Dr. Johnson observes, "a man's words, says the proverb, are his own no longer than while he keeps them unspoken."  III.67 You played once in the university, you say?] The practice of acting Latin plays in the universities of Oxford and Cambridge is very ancient, and continued to near the middle of the last century.  III.68 I did enact Julius Cæsar:] A Latin play on the subject of Cæsar's death, was performed at Christ-church, Oxford, in 1582.  III.69 They stay upon your patience.] Patience is here used for leisure.  III.70 Lying down at Ophelia's feet.] To lie at the feet of a mistress during any dramatic representation, seems to have been a common act of gallantry.  III.71 Jig-maker,] Writer of ludicrous interludes. A jig was not in Shakespeare's time only a dance, but a ludicrous dialogue in metre; many historical ballads were also called jigs.  III.72 For I'll have a suit of sables.] Wherever his scene might be, the customs of his country were ever in Shakespeare's thoughts. A suit trimmed with sables was in our author's own time the richest dress worn by men in England. By the Statute of Apparel, 24 Henry VIII., c. 13, (article furres), it is ordained, that none under the degree of an Earl may use sables.  III.73 He must build churches, then.] Such benefactors to society were sure to be recorded by means of the feast day on which the patron saints and founders of churches were commemorated in every parish. This custom has long since ceased.  III.74 Miching mallecho;] To mich is a provincial word, signifying to lie hid, or to skulk, or act by stealth. It was probably once generally used. Mallecho is supposed to be corrupted from the Spanish Malechor, which means a poisoner.  III.75 The posy of a ring?] Such poetry as you may find engraven on a ring.  III.76 Phœbus' cart] A chariot was anciently called a cart.  III.77 Tellus' orbèd ground,] i.e., the globe of the earth. Tellus is the personification of the earth, being described as the first being that sprung from Chaos.  III.78 My operant powers their functions leave to do:] i.e., my active energies cease to perform their offices.  III.79 What we do determine, oft we break.] Unsettle our most fixed resolves.  III.80 The argument?] The subject matter.  III.81 The mouse-trap.]  He calls it the mouse-trap, because it is the thing,  In which he'll catch the conscience of the king.  III.82 Tropically.] i.e., figuratively.  III.83 The image of a murder,] i.e., the lively portraiture, the correct and faithful representation of a murder, &c.  III.84 Let the galled jade wince,] A proverbial saying.  III.85 Our withers are unwrung.] Withers is the joining of the shoulder bones at the bottom of the neck and mane of a horse. Unwrung is not pinched.  III.86 You are as good as a chorus,] The persons who are supposed to behold what passes in the acts of a tragedy, and sing their sentiments between the acts.  The use to which Shakespeare converted the chorus, may be seen in King Henry V.  III.87 I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.] This refers to the interpreter, who formerly sat on the stage at all puppet shows, and explained to the audience. The puppets dallying are here made to signify to the agitations of Ophelia's bosom.  III.88  The croaking raven  Doth bellow for revenge.]  i.e., begin without more delay; for the raven, foreknowing the deed, is already croaking, and, as it were, calling out for the revenge which will ensue.  III.89 Midnight weeds] The force of the epithet midnight, will be best displayed by a corresponding passage in Macbeth:  "Root of hemlock, digg'd i' the dark."  III.90 Usurp] Encroach upon.  III.91 Let the strucken deer go weep,] Shakespeare, in As you like it, in allusion to the wounded stag, speaks of the big round tears which cours'd one another down his innocent nose in piteous chase. In the 13th song of Drayton's Polyolbion, is a similar passage—"The harte weepeth at his dying; his tears are held to be precious in medicine."  III.92 Marvellous distempered.] i.e., discomposed.  III.93 Admiration.] i.e., wonder.  III.94 Trade with us?] i.e. Occasion of intercourse.  III.95 By these pickers and stealers.] i.e., by these hands. The phrase is taken from the Church catechism, where, in our duty to our neighbour, we are taught to keep our hands from picking and stealing.  III.96 You do freely bar the door of your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.] By your own act you close the way against your own ease, and the free discharge of your griefs, if you open not the source of them to your friends.  III.97 You have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?] Though the crown was elective, yet regard was paid to the recommendation of the preceding prince, and preference given to royal blood, which, by degrees, produced hereditary succession.  III.98 "While the grass grows,"—the proverb is something musty.] The proverb is, "While the grass grows, the steed starves." Hamlet alludes to his own position, while waiting for his succession to the throne of Denmark. A similar adage is, "A slip between the cup and the lip."  III.99 Recorder.] i.e. A kind of flute, or pipe.  III.100 Why do you go about to recover the wind of me,] Equivalent to our more modern saying of Get on the blind side.  III.101 Into a toil?] i.e., net or snare.  III.102 If my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.] If my sense of duty have led me too far, it is affection and regard for you that makes the carriage of that duty border on disrespect.  III.103 Govern these ventages—and it will discourse most eloquent music.] Justly order these vents, or air-holes, and it will breathe or utter, &c.  III.104 Though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.] A fret is a stop or key of a musical instrument. Here is, therefore, a play upon the words. Though you cannot fret, stop, or vex, you cannot play or impose upon me.  III.105 They fool me to the top of my bent.] To the height; as far as they see me incline to go: an allusion to the utmost flexure of a bow.  III.106 Bitter business] i.e., shocking, horrid business.  III.107 Stands it safe with us] Is it consistent with our security.  III.108 This fear,] Bugbear.  III.109 Behind the arras I'll convey myself,] The arras-hangings, in Shakespeare's time, were hung at such a distance from the walls, that a person might easily stand behind them unperceived.  III.110 To hear the process;] The course of the conversation.  III.111 The speech of vantage.] i.e., opportunity or advantage of secret observations.  III.112 Lay home to him:] Pointedly and closely charge him.  III.113 Pranks too broad] Open and bold.  III.114 I'll 'sconce me even here.] 'Sconce and ensconce are constantly used figuratively for hide. In "The Merry Wives of Windsor," Falstaff says, "I will ensconce me behind the arras."  III.115 By the rood,] i.e., the cross or crucifix.  III.116 How now! a rat?] This is an expression borrowed from the History of Hamblet.  III.117 Have not braz'd it so,] i.e., soldered with brass.  III.118 Proof and bulwark against sense.] Against all feeling.  III.119 Takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an innocent love, And sets a blister there;] i.e., takes the clear tint from the brow of unspotted, untainted innocence. "True or honest as the skin between one's brows" was a proverbial expression, and is frequently used by Shakespeare.  III.120 As from the body of contraction plucks The very soul;] Annihilates the very principle of contracts. Contraction for marriage contract.  III.121 The counterfeit presentment] i.e., picture or mimic representation.  III.122 Hypérion's curls;] Hyperion is used by Spenser with the same error in quantity.  III.123 A station like the herald Mercury] Station is attitude—act of standing.  III.124  Like a mildew'd ear,  Blasting his wholesome brother.]  This alludes to Pharaoh's dream, in the 41st chapter of Genesis.  III.125 Batten on this moor?] Batten is to feed rankly.  III.126 Hey-day in the blood] This expression is occasionally used by old authors.  III.127 Thou canst mutine] i.e., rebel.  III.128 As will not leave their tinct.] So dyed in grain, that they will not relinquish or lose their tinct—are not to be discharged. In a sense not very dissimilar he presently says,  "Then what I have to do  Will want true colour."  III.129 An enseamed bed.] i.e., greasy bed of grossly fed indulgence.  III.130 A vice of kings;] i.e., a low mimick of kings. The vice was the fool of the old moralities or dramas, who was generally engaged in contests with the devil, by whom he was finally carried away. Dr. Johnson says the modern Punch is descended from the vice.  III.131  From a shelf the precious diadem stole,  And put it in his pocket!  In allusion to the usurper procuring the crown as a common pilferer or thief, and not by open villainy that carried danger with it.  III.132 A king of shreds and patches.] This is said, pursuing the idea of the vice of kings. The vice being dressed as a fool, in a coat of party-coloured patches.  III.133 Laps'd in time and passion,] That having suffered time to slip, and passion to cool, &c. It was supposed that nothing was more offensive to apparitions than the neglect to attach importance to their appearance, or to be inattentive to their admonitions.  III.134 Cool patience.] i.e., moderation.  III.135 Make them capable.] Make them intelligent—capable of conceiving.  III.136 My stem effects:] i.e., change the nature of my purposes, or what I mean to effect.  III.137 Nothing at all; yet all that is, I see.] It is in perfect consistency with the belief that all spirits were not only naturally invisible, but that they possessed the power of making themselves visible to such persons only as they pleased.  III.138 My father, in his habit as he lived!] In the habit he was accustomed to wear when living.  III.139  This bodiless creation ecstasy  Is very cunning in.]  i.e., "Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries." Ecstasy in this place, as in many others, means a temporary alienation of mind—a fit.  III.140 Gambol from.] Start away from.  III.141 Skin and film,] Cover with a thin skin.  III.142  And when you are desirous to be bless'd,  I'll blessing beg of you]  When you are desirous to receive a blessing from heaven (which you cannot, seriously, till you reform), I will beg to receive a blessing from you.  75  ACT IV. Scene I.—A ROOM IN THE CASTLE. Enter King and Queen, from (R.H.) centre.  King. There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:  You must translate:1 'tis fit we understand them.  How does Hamlet?  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend  Which is the mightier: In his lawless fit,  Behind the arras hearing something stir,  Whips out his rapier, cries A rat, a rat!  And, in this brainish apprehension,2 kills  The unseen good old man.  King. O heavy deed!  It had been so with us, had we been there:  Where is he gone?  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd.  King. The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,  But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed  We must, with all our majesty and skill,  Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!  Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern (L.H.)  Friends both, go join you with some further aid:  Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,  And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:  Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body  Into the chapel.  [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern cross to R.]  76 I pray you, haste in this.  [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, R.H.]  Go, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends;  And let them know, both what we mean to do,  And what's untimely done.  [Exit Queen, R.C.]  How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!  Yet must not we put the strong law on him:  He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,  Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;  And where 'tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,  But never the offence.3  Enter Rosencrantz (R.)  How now! what hath befallen?  Ros. Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,  We cannot get from him.  King. But where is he?  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.  King. Bring him before us.  Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.  Enter Hamlet, Guildenstern, and Attendants (R.H.)  King. (C.) Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?  Ham. (R.) At supper.  King. At supper? Where?  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain convocation of politick worms4 are e'en at him.  King. Where's Polonius?  Ham. In Heaven; send thither to see: if your messenger find him not there, seek him i'the other place yourself. But, indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.  King. Go seek him there. [To Guildenstern.]  77Ham. He will stay till you come.  [Exit Guildenstern, R.H.]  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,  Must send thee hence:  Therefore prepare thyself;  The bark is ready, and the wind at help,5  For England.  Ham. For England!  King. Ay, Hamlet.  Ham. Good.  King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.  Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England!—Farewell, dear mother.  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.  Ham. My mother: Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England.  [Exit, R.H.]  King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard;  Away! for everything is seal'd and done.  [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Attendants, R.H.]  And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,  Thou may'st not coldly set6  Our sovereign process;7 which imports at full,  By letters conjuring to that effect,8  The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;  For thou must cure me: 'Till I know 'tis done,  Howe'er my haps,9 my joys will ne'er begin.  [Exit King, L.H.]  Enter Queen and Horatio R. centre.  Queen. —— I will not speak with her.  Hor. She is importunate; indeed, distract:  'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew  Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.  Queen. Let her come in.  [Exit Horatio, R.C.]  78Re-enter Horatio, with Ophelia R. centre.  Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?  Queen. How now, Ophelia!  Oph. (C.) [Singing.]  How should I your true love know  From another one?  By his cockle hat and staff,  And his sandal shoon.10  Queen. (L.C.) Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?  Oph. Say you? nay, pray you, mark.  [Sings.]  He is dead and gone, lady,  He is dead and gone;  At his head a grass-green turf,  At his heels a stone.  Enter the King (L.H.)  Queen. Nay, but, Ophelia,——  Oph. Pray you, mark.  [Sings.]  White his shroud as the mountain-snow,  Larded all with sweet flowers;11  Which bewept to the grave did go  With true-love showers.  King. How do you, pretty lady?  Oph. Well, Heaven 'ield you!12 (Crosses to the King.)  They say the owl was a baker's daughter.13 We know what we are, but know not what we may be.  King. Conceit upon her father.14  Oph. Pray, you, let us have no words of this; but when they ask you what it means, say you this:  To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,  All in the morning betime,  79 And I, a maid at your window,  To be your Valentine:  King. Pretty Ophelia!  Oph. Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on't:  Then up he rose, and don'd his clothes,  And dupp'd15 the chamber door;  Let in the maid, that out a maid  Never departed more.  [Crosses to R.H.]  King. (L.) How long hath she been thus?  Oph. (R.) I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i'the cold ground. My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good night, good night.  [Exit, R.C.]  King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.  [Exit Horatio, through centre R.]  O! this is the poison of deep grief; it springs  All from her father's death.  O, Gertrude, Gertrude,  When sorrows come, they come not single spies,  But in battalions!  Enter Marcellus R. centre.  King. What is the matter?  Mar. Save yourself, my lord:  The young Laertes, in a riotous head,16  O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord;  They cry, Choose we: Laertes shall be king!  Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,  Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!  [Noise within, R.C.]  Enter Laertes, armed; Danes following R. centre.  Laer. Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.  Dan. No, let's come in.  80Laer. I pray you, give me leave.  Dan. We will, we will.  [They retire without, R.H.]  Laer. O, thou vile king,  Give me my father.  Queen (Interposing.) Calmly, good Laertes.  Laer. (R.) That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;  Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot  Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow  Of my true mother.17  King. (L.) What is the cause, Laertes,  That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?  Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person:  There's such divinity doth hedge a king,18  That treason can but peep to what it would,  Acts little of his will.  Let him go, Gertrude.  [Queen obeys.]  Laer. Where is my father?  King. Dead.  Queen. But not by him.  King. Let him demand his fill.  Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:  To hell, allegiance! To this point I stand,  That both the worlds I give to negligence,19  Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd  Most throughly for my father.  King. Who shall stay you!  Laer. My will, not all the world's:20  And, for my means, I'll husband them so well,  They shall go far with little.  King. Good Laertes,  That I am guiltless of your father's death,  81 And am most sensible in grief21 for it,  It shall as level to your judgment 'pear  As day does to your eye.  Hor. (Without.) Oh, poor Ophelia!  King. Let her come in.  Enter Ophelia (R.C.), fantastically dressed with Straws and Flowers.  Laer. (Goes up L.C.) O rose of May!  Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!  O heavens! is't possible, a young maid's wits  Should be as mortal as an old man's life?  Oph. (R.C.)  They bore him barefac'd on the bier;  And on his grave rain many a tear,—  Fare you well, my dove!  Laer. (Coming down R) Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,  It could not move thus.  Oph. You must sing, Down-a-down,22 an you call him a-down-a. O, how well the wheel becomes it!23 It is the false steward, that stole his master's daughter.  Laer. This nothing's more than matter.  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance;24 pray you, love, remember: and there is pansies,25 that's for thoughts.  Laer. A document in madness; thoughts and remembrance fitted.  Oph. There's fennel for you, (crosses to the King on L.H.) and columbines:26 there's rue for you; (turns to the Queen, 82who is R.C.) and here's some for me:—we may call it herb of grace o'Sundays:27—you may wear your rue with a difference.28—There's a daisy:29—I would give you some violets,30 but they withered all when my father died:—They say he made a good end,——  For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy—31  Laer. (R.) Thought and affliction,32 passion, hell itself, She turns to favour and to prettiness.  Oph.  And will he not come again?  And will he not come again?  No, no, he is dead,  Gone to his death-bed,  He never will come again.  His beard was white as snow,  All flaxen was his poll:  He is gone, he is gone,  And we cast away moan:  Heaven 'a mercy on his soul!  And of all christian souls, I pray Heaven. Heaven be wi' you.  [Exit Ophelia, R.C., Queen following.]  Laer. Do you see this, O Heaven?  83King. (L.C.) Laertes, I must commune with your grief,33  Or you deny me right.  Be you content to lend your patience to us,  And we shall jointly labour with your soul  To give it due content.  Laer. (R.C.) Let this be so;  His means of death, his obscure funeral,—  No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,34  No noble rite nor formal ostentation,—  Cry to be heard,35 as 'twere from heaven to earth,  That I must call't in question.  King. So you shall;  And where the offence is let the great axe fall.36  How now! what news?  Enter Bernardo (R.H.C.)  Ber. (C.) Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:  This to your majesty; this to the Queen.  King. From Hamlet! who brought them?  Ber. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.  King. Laertes, you shall hear them.—  Leave us. [Exit, L.H.C.]  [Reads.] High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on your kingdom.37 To morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.  Hamlet.  What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?  Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?  Laer. (R.) Know you the hand?  King. (L.) 'Tis Hamlet's character:38 Naked,—  84 And in a postscript here, he says, alone.  Can you advise me?  Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come;  It warms the very sickness in my heart,  That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,  Thus diddest thou.  King. If it be so, Laertes,  Will you be rul'd by me?  Laer. Ay, my lord;  So you will not o'er-rule me to a peace.  King. To thine own peace.  Some two months since,  Here was a gentleman of Normandy,  He made confession of39 you;  And gave you such a masterly report,  For art and exercise in your defence,40  And for your rapier most especially,  That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed,  If one could match you: this report of his  Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy,  That he could nothing do but wish and beg  Your sudden coming o'er, to play with you.  Now, out of this,——  Laer. What out of this, my lord?  King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?  Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,  A face without a heart?  Laer. Why ask you this?  King. Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home:  We'll put on those shall praise your excellence,  And set a double varnish on the fame  The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine, together,  And wager o'er your heads; he, being remiss,41  Most generous, and free from all contriving,  Will not peruse the foils:42 so that, with ease,  Or with a little shuffling, you may choose  85 A sword unbated,43 and, in a pass of practice,44  Requite him for your father.  Laer. I will do't:  And, for the purpose, I'll anoint my sword.  I bought an unction of a mountebank,  So mortal, that but dip a knife in it,  Where it draws blood no cataplasm45 so rare,  Collected from all simples46 that have virtue  Under the moon, can save the thing from death  That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point  With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,  It may be death.  King. (L.) Let's further think of this;  We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings,47  When in your motion48 you are hot and dry,  (As make your bouts more violent to that end,)  And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared him  A chalice for the nonce;49 whereon but sipping,  If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,50  Our purpose may hold there. But stay, what noise?  Enter Queen (R.C.)  Queen. (C.) One woe doth tread upon another's heel,  So fast they follow: Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.  Laer. (R.) Drown'd! O, where?  Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,  That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;  Therewith fantastick garlands did she make  Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples;51  86 There, on the pendent boughs her cornet weeds  Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke;  When down her weedy trophies, and herself,  Fell in the weeping brook.  Laer. I forbid my tears: But yet  It is our trick:52 nature her custom holds,  Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,  The woman will be out.53  Adieu, my lord:  I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,  But that this folly drowns it.54  [Exeunt. C.]  END OF ACT FOURTH. Notes Act IV  IV.1 Translate:] Interpret.  IV.2 In this brainish apprehension,] Distempered, brainsick mood.  IV.3 Where the offender's scourge is weigh'd, But never the offence.] When an offender is popular, the people never consider what his crime was, but they scrutinise his punishment.  IV.4 Politick worms] i.e., artful, cunning worms.  IV.5 The wind at help,] i.e., ready.  IV.6 May'st not coldly set] Set is to value or estimate. "Thou may'st not set little by it, or estimate it lightly."  IV.7 Our sovereign process:] i.e., our royal design.  IV.8 By letters conjuring to that effect,] The verb to conjure, in the sense of to supplicate, was formerly accented on the first syllable.  IV.9 Howe'er my haps,] Chances of fortune.  IV.10 His sandal shoon.] Shoon is the old plural of shoe. The verse is descriptive of a pilgrim. While this kind of devotion was in favour, love intrigues were carried on under that mask.  IV.11 Larded with sweet flowers;] i.e., Garnished with sweet flowers.  IV.12 Heaven 'ield you.] Requite; yield you recompence.  IV.13 The owl was a baker's daughter.] This is in reference to a story that was once prevalent among the common people of Gloucestershire.  IV.14 Conceit upon her father.] Fancies respecting her father.  IV.15 Don'd and dupp'd] To don, is to do on, or put on, as doff is to do off, or put off. To dupp is to do up, or lift up the latch.  IV.16 In a riotous head,] The tide, strongly flowing, is said to pour in with a great head.  IV.17 The chaste unsmirched brow of my true mother.] Unsmirched is unstained, not defiled.  IV.18 Doth hedge a king,] The word hedge is used by the gravest writers upon the highest subjects.  IV.19 Both the worlds I give to negligence,] I am careless of my present and future prospects, my views in this life, as well as that which is to come.  IV.20 My will, not all the world's:] i.e., by my will as far as my will is concerned, not all the world shall stop me; and, as for my means, I'll husband them so well, they shall go far, though really little.  IV.21 Sensible in grief] Poignantly affected with.  IV.22 You must sing Down-a-down,] This was the burthen of an old song, well known in Shakespeare's time.  IV.23 How well the wheel becomes it!] This probably means that the song or charm is well adapted to those who are occupied at spinning at the wheel.  IV.24 There's rosemary, that's for remembrance;] Rosemary was anciently supposed to strengthen the memory, and was carried at funerals and wore at weddings. It was also considered the emblem of fidelity in lovers; and at weddings it was usual to dip the rosemary in the cup, and drink to the health of the new married couple.  IV.25 There is pansies,] i.e., a little flower called heart's-ease. Pansies in French signifies thoughts.  IV.26 There's fennel for you, and columbines:] Fennel was considered an emblem of flattery, and columbine was anciently supposed to be a thankless flower; signifying probably that the courtiers flattered to get favours, and were thankless after receiving them. Columbine was emblematical of forsaken lovers.  IV.27 There's rue for you; and here's some for me:—we may call it herb of grace o' Sundays:] Probably a quibble is meant here, as rue anciently signified the same as ruth, i.e., sorrow. In the common dictionaries of Shakespeare's time, it was called herb of grace. Ophelia wishes to remind the Queen of the sorrow and contrition she ought to feel for her unlawful marriage; and that she may wear her rue with peculiar propriety on Sundays, when she solicits pardon for the crime which she has so much occasion to rue and repent of.—Malone.  IV.28 You may wear your rue with a difference.] i.e., to distinguish it from that worn by Ophelia, herself: because her tears flowed from the loss of a father—those of the Queen ought to flow for her guilt.  IV.29 There's a daisy:] A daisy signified a warning to young women, not to trust the fair promises of their lovers.  IV.30 I would give you some violets,] Violets signified faithfulness.  IV.31 For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy,—] Part of an old song.  IV.32 Thought and affliction,] Thought here, as in many other places, means melancholy.  IV.33 I must commune with your grief,] i.e., confer, discuss, or argue with.  IV.34 No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,] Not only the sword, but the helmet, gauntlet, spurs, and tabard, (i.e., a coat whereon the armorial ensigns were anciently depicted, from whence the term coat of armour), are hung over the grave of every knight.  IV.35 Cry to be heard,] All these multiplied incitements are things which cry, &c.  IV.36 Let the great axe fall.] i.e., the axe that is to be laid to the root.  IV.37 Naked on your kingdom,] i.e., unprovided and defenceless.  IV.38 'Tis Hamlet's character,] Peculiar mode of shaping his letters.  IV.39 Made confession of] Acknowledged.  IV.40 In your defence,] i.e., "in your art and science of defence."  IV.41 He, being remiss,] i.e., unsuspicious, not cautious.  IV.42 Peruse the foils;] Closely inspect them.  IV.43 A sword unbated,] Not blunted, as foils are by a button fixed to the end. 